letterpaper



math, positioning, calc, shapes, arrows.meta, patterns


 
 
[2][1=]
[2][1=]



mystyle 
    backgroundcolor=,   
    commentstyle=, 
    keywordstyle=,
    numberstyle=codegray, 
    stringstyle=,
    basicstyle=, 
    breakatwhitespace=false,         
    breaklines=true,                 
    captionpos=t,                    
    keepspaces=true,                 
    numbers=left,                    
    numbersep=5pt,                  
    showspaces=false,                
    showstringspaces=false, 
    showtabs=false,                  
    tabsize=2

style=mystyle, commentstyle=, breaklines=True

mypython

	keywords=[1]from, import, as, assert, not, print, nonneg, boolean,
	keywordstyle=[1],
	keywords=[2]cp, np, pd, cvxpy, numpy, pandas, sum, multiply, Variable, array,
    max, unique, sum_largest, hstack, matmul, Problem, Minimize, solve, range, set,
    max_daily_powers,
	keywordstyle=[2],
	upquote=true,
	showstringspaces=false,
	basicstyle=,
	columns=fullflexible,
	keepspaces=true,
	emph=True,False,def,return,float,class,match,switch,len,
	emphstyle=,
	belowskip=1em,
	aboveskip=1em,
    morecomment=[l]


cvqp.bib




  
  















 







An Operator Splitting Method for Large-Scale CVaR-Constrained Quadratic Programs

[1]Eric Luxenberg(Equal contribution.)

[1]Steven Diamond
[1]Stephen Boyd
[1]Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
[2]Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology



 
We introduce a fast and scalable method for solving quadratic programs with
conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) constraints. While these problems can be
formulated as standard quadratic programs, the number of variables and
constraints grows linearly with the number of scenarios, making general-purpose
solvers impractical for large-scale problems. Our method combines operator
splitting with a specialized  algorithm for projecting onto CVaR
constraints, where  is the number of scenarios. The method alternates between
solving a linear system and performing parallel projections, onto CVaR
constraints using our specialized algorithm and onto box constraints by
simple clipping. Numerical examples from several application domains
demonstrate that our method outperforms general-purpose solvers by several
orders of magnitude on problems with up to millions of scenarios. Our method is
implemented in an open-source package called CVQP.


Introduction
Many applications in finance and engineering require controlling the risk
of extreme outcomes. A widely used measure for tail risk is the
conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), defined as the expected value of
losses exceeding a given quantile. CVaR is a coherent and convex risk
measure , so optimization
problems involving CVaR can be reliably and efficiently solved.

Many practical applications, from portfolio optimization to quantile regression,
can be formulated as quadratic programs with CVaR constraints. While these
problems are convex and can be reformulated as standard quadratic programs, the
number of variables and constraints grows linearly with the number of scenarios.
For problems with many scenarios, general-purpose solvers become prohibitively
slow or fail entirely. To address this challenge, we develop a fast and scalable
method for solving quadratic programs with CVaR constraints.

We present two main contributions. First, we develop an  algorithm
for projecting onto CVaR constraints, where  is the number of scenarios.
Building on this algorithm, our second contribution is an operator splitting
method for solving large-scale CVaR-constrained quadratic programs. The method
alternates between solving a linear system and performing parallel projections,
onto CVaR constraints using our specialized algorithm and onto box constraints
by simple clipping. Numerical examples from
several application domains demonstrate that our method outperforms
general-purpose solvers by several orders of magnitude on problems with up to
millions of scenarios.

Conditional value-at-risk (CVaR)
The conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) at level  is a risk measure that
captures the expected value over the worst  fraction of outcomes of a
real-valued random variable. For a random variable  representing losses
(where larger values are worse), we first define the value-at-risk (VaR) at
level  as



CVaR at level  is defined as the expected value of all losses exceeding
VaR at level , 



At the same level , CVaR provides an upper bound on VaR.

Sample CVaR.
For a finite set of samples  representing the distribution
of losses, Rockafellar and Uryasev showed that
the CVaR at level , denoted , can be
computed as



where  is the positive part of . 
A CVaR constraint at level  can be represented by a set of linear
inequality constraints,








CVaR-constrained quadratic programs
This work presents a customized solver for the CVaR-constrained
quadratic program (CVQP),


where  is the decision variable. The objective function is
defined by a positive semidefinite matrix  and a vector . The CVaR constraint is defined by
quantile level , threshold , and matrix
. Additional linear inequality constraints are defined by a matrix
, and vectors
,
. 
Since  is positive semidefinite and the constraints are convex, the CVQP is
a convex optimization problem.
We focus on the case where ,
, the number of additional constraints is much smaller than the number of
scenarios.

We assume the CVQP problem e-cvar_constrained_qp is feasible and
that , , and  have zero common nullspace, which ensures that the
problem is bounded. This condition also implies that the matrix
 is positive definite for any , which
is needed for the ADMM linear system solve described in s-admm.
In practice the condition holds when  is positive definite or when 
has full column rank.

CVaR terms in the objective. 
The CVQP formulation extends to problems with CVaR terms in the objective.
Consider the problem






Using the translation-equivariance property of CVaR (i.e., ), we introduce an auxiliary variable  and reformulate as






Defining the decision variable as the pair , this is an instance
of the standard CVQP form e-cvar_constrained_qp.

Quadratic program solvers. By using the linear inequality
representation of the CVaR constraint, the CVQP can be reformulated as a
standard quadratic program and solved with any QP solver. However, when the
number of scenarios  is large, this approach becomes prohibitively slow.

Applications.
CVaR-constrained quadratic programs arise in many domains.
In portfolio optimization,  represents portfolio weights and 
gives portfolio losses across  return scenarios; the CVaR constraint
limits the expected loss in the worst  fraction of scenarios,
while the quadratic objective captures risk-adjusted returns
.
In supply chain planning,  includes order quantities and routing
decisions, with scenarios modeling demand uncertainty and supplier
disruptions; CVaR constraints bound extreme total cost realizations
.
Similar formulations appear in network flow problems with stochastic
capacities, facility location and
disaster response logistics, energy systems
with uncertain generation and prices, and radiation
treatment planning, where CVaR constraints replace intractable
dose-volume constraints.
In control and statistical learning, CVaR provides tractable convex
approximations to chance constraints
.
For a comprehensive review, see.

Related work
CVaR constraints were introduced by Rockafellar and Uryasev
 and are now standard in risk-constrained
optimization. Our method builds on operator
splitting, which decomposes the problem into simpler
subproblems: a linear system solve and projections.

The CVaR projection algorithm adds to a family of finite-termination projection
methods, including the classical simplex projection and
isotonic regression. Concurrently with the
development of our CVaR projection algorithm, Roth and Cui released a preprint, 
later published as, containing two finite termination algorithms for CVaR projection attaining the
same complexity. After corresponding with the authors, we were
unable to find any equivalence between their algorithms and ours.

Roth and Cui also proposed a second-order computational
framework for CVaR-constrained optimization, using a semismooth Newton-based
augmented Lagrangian method. As a second-order method, it can achieve superlinear convergence near a
solution, while ADMM is a first-order method with an  convergence
rate. On the other hand, each ADMM
iteration is cheap (a single backsolve and parallel projections after an
initial factorization), and the method is simple to implement. In our
experience, ADMM reaches moderate accuracy in few iterations, which is
sufficient for most applications.

Outline
This paper is organized as follows. In s-admm, we present an ADMM-based
solution method for the CVQP. s-cvar_projection establishes theoretical
foundations for projecting onto CVaR constraints, which we use to develop our
 projection algorithm in s-procedure. In
s-experiments, we present benchmark results comparing our method against
state-of-the-art solvers on portfolio optimization and quantile regression
problems with up to millions of scenarios. s-extensions discusses
possible extensions to our method.

Solution via ADMM

ADMM
We solve the CVQP by reformulating the problem
and applying the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM).
By introducing auxiliary variables  and
, we can rewrite problem
e-cvar_constrained_qp as






where .
The auxiliary variables  and  decouple the CVaR constraint
from the box constraints, so that each can be handled separately
in the ADMM updates below.
Here,  and  are the indicator functions for the sets
 and , respectively, given by 





We use the scaled dual variables 
and , where  is a hyperparameter and  and  are the vectors of dual variables
associated with the equality constraints  and ,
respectively.
We use ADMM with over-relaxation 
(see for
analysis), with over-relaxation parameter .

For notational convenience we define the linear system parameters



Our assumption on the common nullspace of , , and  implies that
 is positive definite.
The ADMM updates are

The operator  is the (Euclidean) projection onto
 and
 is the projection onto the set .
The over-relaxation, dual updates, and box projection are all trivial
operations; the linear system solve requires one cached factorization
of . The main computational bottleneck is the CVaR projection
e-update_z_proj-final, which we address in s-cvar_projection-.

It is well known that this ADMM algorithm converges
, with a worst-case 
convergence rate, though linear convergence is commonly observed in
practice for quadratic programs.

Dynamic penalty parameter. 
While ADMM converges for any fixed penalty parameter , the convergence
rate can be improved by adaptively updating . A simple and effective
update scheme adjusts  based on the relative magnitudes of the primal and
dual residuals. When the primal residual is  times larger than the dual
residual, we multiply  by a factor ; when the dual residual is
 times larger than the primal residual, we divide  by . Since
 appears in the matrix , each update requires re-factorizing the linear
system. To balance computational cost with convergence benefits, we perform
these updates at fixed intervals of  iterations.


Evaluating the updates
The updates
e-update_z_half, e-update_ztilde_half, e-update_u, and
e-update_utilde are trivial to implement.
The update e-update_ztilde_proj-final is also a very simple clipping
operation:







where .

The update e-update_x-final can be expressed as ,
which requires the solution of a linear system of equations with positive definite 
coefficient matrix .
We factorize  once
(for example, a sparse Cholesky or  factorization) so that subsequent solves
require only the backsolve.
This can substantially improve the efficiency of this step; when  is dense,
for example, the first factorization costs  flops, while subsequent solves
require only  flops.  (When  is sparse the speedup from caching 
the factorization is smaller than , but still very significant.)

That leaves only the CVaR projection e-update_z_proj-final, for
which we develop an  algorithm in the next two sections.

Summary
For convenience we summarize the complete CVQP method in
Algorithm . The CVaR projection is the main computational
bottleneck and uses the  algorithm described in
s-procedure.



CVaR projection preliminaries We now present preliminaries that motivate our
efficient algorithm for evaluating the projection operator , , 
for solving the problem

with variable .

The CVaR constraint can be expressed equivalently using the sum of 
largest components
function, 
e-sumkproj
  f_k(z)=_i=1^k z_[i], 
where  are the components of  in 
nonincreasing order. This is a convex function that sums the  largest elements of a vector
(the pointwise maximum of  linear functions).
Setting  and evaluating the infimum over  in the
Rockafellar-Uryasev formula (the minimizer is ), we obtain
. The constraint  is
therefore equivalent to .
We rewrite problem e-cvar_projection as

where . We assume 
(and round up to the nearest integer if not).

We will use the formulation e-sumklargest_projection to derive
our CVaR projection algorithm. While this is a computationally tractable convex
optimization problem, we seek closed form or computationally efficient ways to
evaluate this projection operator. Since merely evaluating  with  has a
complexity of , we desire a similar complexity for the projection
operator. 

Sorted projectionLet  be a permutation matrix that sorts  in
descending order, , .
We will denote the sorted vector  as .
Since for any ,



the solution to the projection problem is given by
    z^&=& _f_k(z) d v-z_2^2

            &=& _f_k(Pz) d Pv-Pz_2^2

            &=& P^T(_f_k(u) d v'-u_2^2).

The last equality is the change of variable .
In words, we can sort  in descending order, project the sorted vector , and unsort
the result to obtain the projection of  onto the set .

Optimality conditionsWe characterize the optimality conditions of the projection problem; these
conditions will be used in s-correctness to prove the correctness of the
algorithm. Let 
be the set of all  -hot indicator vectors.
Since , the constraint
 is equivalent to  for all .
We can therefore rewrite problem e-sumklargest_projection
in the equivalent form






where the subscript  enumerates the elements of .

The KKT conditions tell us a  pair is optimal if and only if 


 
and





The optimality conditions motivate an algorithm that solves the KKT
system. We will define , where  is the vector we remove
from  to get the projection. The KKT conditions above imply that
 is a nonnegative combination of the vectors  for which
, , the indicators of the largest  entries of . (Note
that there are potentially several such vectors in the presence of ties: consider the
largest 2 entries in the vector .)
Thus, if we can construct a vector  that is a nonnegative combination of
largest- indicator vectors, such that , 
then we have found the projection .

Algorithm motivation
We describe at a high level the motivation behind our projection algorithm.
We pre-process by sorting and work with the sorted vector , since from
s-perm we know that sort-project-unsort is the same as projecting. We then proceed
by incrementally constructing  until the sum of the  largest elements
of  is equal to .

We want to begin decreasing elements of  until the sum of the  largest
elements is equal to . Intuitively, we should decrease the largest 
elements without modifying the remaining elements, since they do not affect the sum.
We begin by reducing the largest elements uniformly until either the constraint is
satisfied, or until the th largest element ties the next element. 
We reduce each of the  largest elements by the same amount because we are
penalized by the sum of squared changes.

If reducing the largest  elements causes elements  and  to tie, it is
intuitive that the tied elements should be further reduced by the same amount;
otherwise a reduction would be applied to an element not in the largest . 
Since we also want to uniformly decrease the largest elements preceding the tie,
we need to decide the ratio of these two reductions. Given this ratio, we reduce
the untied and tied entries until either the constraint is satisfied or the next
tie occurs.

We will need to determine this ratio at each step of the algorithm, since
at a given step of the algorithm, the altered vector  will be partitioned
into three regions: first the largest  untied elements, then the
 tied elements, and lastly the remaining unaltered elements:





The core insight of the algorithm is deriving the ratio of reducing the untied
and tied elements; this ratio is derived in s-procedure.

CVaR projection algorithmWith the preliminaries in place, we now present our CVaR projection algorithm.
Pre- and post-processing.
The CVaR projection algorithm is applied to the vector  sorted in descending
order as described in s-perm. The complexity of sorting  and then unsorting
the projection is . The sorting and unsorting are in practice carried
out with indices; the permutation matrix  is never explicitly formed.

Algorithm state.
The algorithm's state is
2

    : the iterate number,
    : the number of untied entries,
    : the number of tied entries,
    : the decrease to the untied entries,
    : the sum of the largest  entries,
    : the value of the tied entries,
    : the value of the last untied entry, 
    : the value of the first unaltered entry.
The algorithm is initialized with , , ,
, , and .
The algorithm repeats the decrease step described in s-decrease
until , after which the projection of the sorted ,




 
is formed, unsorted, and returned.

Decrease stepAt each step, the algorithm decreases the entries of  along a direction
 that depends on the current group structure.
The update is , where  is chosen
as the largest scaling such that  remains sorted and the sum of its
 largest entries stays at least .
Three events can limit :
the last untied entry reaches the tied value
      (merge: the untied block shrinks by one),
the tied value reaches the first unaltered entry
      (absorb: the tied block grows by one),
the sum constraint  is met (termination).
On every nonterminal step, the tied block grows by one entry
(from a merge or an absorb).
The algorithm terminates in at most  steps.
We handle the first step separately because there is no tied block yet;
all subsequent steps share the same general formulas.

First step.
On the first step,  and .
The direction is




, all  entries decrease uniformly.
Since there is no tied block, only absorb and termination can occur, giving
.
If , the algorithm terminates with .
Otherwise, entries  and  form a tied block, and the state
is updated to







The values of  and  are updated as in the general step below,
using the new , , and .

General step.
For all subsequent steps,  and .
The direction is





The untied entries decrease at rate , the tied entries
at rate , and the unaltered entries are unchanged.
Note that  is a nonnegative combination of -hot indicator vectors:
e-delta
(n_u,n_t,k)=1n_t-1k-n_u-1_I(n_u,n_t,k),
where








is the set of -hot indicator vectors whose first  entries are ,
with the remaining  ones among entries  through .

Scaling the step.
We now describe how to compute  for the general step.
Let .
The scaling  is the minimum of three candidate step sizes,
corresponding to the three events described above.

[label=(*)]
Merge.
The step  at which the last untied entry reaches the tied value,
, .
If , there are no untied entries, and . Otherwise,
.

Absorb.
The step  at which the tied value reaches the first unaltered entry,
, .
If , there are no unaltered entries, and .
Otherwise, since the tied entries decrease at unit rate while  is
unchanged, .

Termination.
The step  at which the sum of the  largest entries equals ,
, , where
.
The step is , and the update is
.

Updating the state.
Instead of explicitly carrying out this
vector subtraction at every step (which would have a complexity of  per
iterate), the constant size algorithm state is updated to reflect the change
in the vector. The updates are applied in the order shown:












The first group (, , ) uses the pre-update values
of  and ; the second group (, ) uses the
updated values of , , and .

Complexity
At each step,  either decreases by , or remains the same. At each step,
 increases by . If the algorithm hasn't terminated after  steps, then
there are  tied entries, thus the subsequent decrease step will reduce the sum
to the desired value, and the algorithm will terminate. Each step of the
algorithm has constant complexity, and thus the algorithm (with sorted input)
has complexity . Therefore, including the sorting and unsorting, the total
complexity of the algorithm is .

CorrectnessAt termination, the algorithm returns .
Note that by e-delta, each  is a nonnegative combination of
largest- indicator vectors.
Thus, the algorithm returns  which satisfies
e-proj-cond-1
    v'-z = _i=1^mk _i a_i, _i 0, i=1,,mk.
Since the decrease step maintains the monotonicity of ,
all previous largest- indicators are still valid indicators of the largest
 entries of . Thus, the termination criterion provides that
e-proj-cond-2
    a_i^Tz d, (a_i^Tz < d _i = 0), i=1,,mk.
However, e-proj-cond-1 and e-proj-cond-2 are exactly
the KKT conditions for the projection problem described in s-kkt.
Therefore, the algorithm correctly computes the projection of  onto the set .

Numerical experiments
We compare our CVaR projection algorithm and our CVQP solver with two
general-purpose solvers, Mosek and Clarabel. We first benchmark the projection
algorithm on synthetic instances, then benchmark the CVQP solver on
portfolio optimization and quantile regression problems.
Code is available at https://github.com/cvxgrp/cvqp.

Experimental setup
All experiments were run on a Google Cloud n1-highmem-32 instance
(32 vCPUs, 208 GB RAM), with a two-hour time limit per solve.
For our CVQP solver we use ADMM penalty parameter ,
over-relaxation parameter , and update  adaptively
with parameters  and .
We stop when primal and dual residuals satisfy absolute tolerance 
and relative tolerance .
Mosek and Clarabel are called through CVXPY with default settings.
When we tighten our tolerances to , objective values agree with both solvers
to about four significant figures.

CVaR projection
We generate random CVaR projection problems with vectors  having
entries uniformly distributed on , with  and .
For each , we set the constraint
threshold to  in problem e-sumklargest_projection,
where  controls problem difficulty (larger  gives easier
problems), and project  onto the convex set .

Results.
Figure  shows solve times versus number of scenarios  for
, averaged over 10 random instances. Our method solves these problems
in  ms at  and  s at , more than two orders of
magnitude faster than both Mosek and Clarabel across all tested sizes.
Mosek does not solve instances with  within the time limit.


            CVaR projection solve times, with .
    

Portfolio optimization
We consider a portfolio optimization problem with  assets and  return
scenarios. The matrix  contains asset returns, where
 is the return of asset  in scenario . The mean return vector  and covariance matrix
 are given by




The portfolio optimization problem is








with variable  (the portfolio weights), risk aversion
parameter , and a CVaR constraint bounding the expected loss
in the worst  fraction of scenarios.

CVQP form. The problem maps to CVQP form as









Problem instances. We generate return scenarios using a
two-component Gaussian mixture model



where  is the probability of normal market conditions,  is the mean
return per asset (positive in normal conditions, negative in stress periods), and
 scales the volatility during stress periods. We use parameters







Results.
Figure  shows solve times versus number of scenarios 
for problems with  assets, averaged over 3 random instances. Our method
is faster than both general-purpose solvers by one to three orders of magnitude.
Mosek does not solve instances with  within the time limit,
and Clarabel does not solve instances with .
Our method solves instances with up to one million scenarios in under 26 minutes.


            Portfolio optimization solve times, with  assets.
    
Quantile regression
Given  data points with features  and responses
, the -quantile regression problem is



with variables  and , where
 is the tilted  penalty
and  is the quantile level. The asymmetric penalty weighs
underpredictions  times more than overpredictions, so the optimal
prediction is the conditional -quantile of  given , rather than
the conditional mean.

CVaR reformulation.
Defining the feature matrix  with rows ,
the response vector , and ,
we use the identity  to write the objective as



where . The terms involving  can be written as



which is  times the sample CVaR formula evaluated at .
Minimizing over  yields the infimum in the CVaR definition.
Since  is constant and , the problem reduces to



with variable . Introducing an epigraph variable  for the
CVaR term gives







CVQP form.
We introduce an auxiliary variable  with the constraint , and define
. The CVQP parameters, with CVaR
level , are









Problem instances.
We generate features  with independent standard normal
entries, a vector with entries ,
and responses , where  follows a
-distribution with 5 degrees of freedom scaled by . We use quantile
level .

Results.
Figure  shows solve times versus number of scenarios  for
quantile regression problems with  features, averaged over 3 random
instances. Our method is faster than both Mosek and Clarabel across all tested sizes,
by a factor ranging from about 5 to over 100.
Mosek does not solve instances with  within the time limit,
and Clarabel does not solve instances with .
Our method scales to  scenarios.


            Quantile regression solve times, with  features.
    
Extensions and variations
Our method extends to more general problems and admits several practical variations.

More general constraints on .
When projection onto a set  is efficient (via a closed-form solution
or a fast algorithm), we can directly handle constraints of the form
 in place of the box constraints .

Extensions to the -update.
The method extends to additional constraints on  or
nonquadratic objective functions. The -update then becomes






where  is any convex function (not just quadratic), , and  is a convex set. Using a
standard solver with warm-starting, the per-iteration cost remains manageable, 
though typically higher than solving the original linear system.  

Equilibration.
Equilibration as a preprocessing step often improves
ADMM convergence, particularly for problems with poorly scaled data.

Warm starting.
Two effective strategies for choosing the initial point are
(1) solving with a reduced set of scenarios and using that solution to initialize the full problem,
and (2) using a quadratic approximation of the CVaR constraint to compute an initial point.
Similarly, the sorting step in the CVaR projection can be warm-started
using the sorted order from the previous ADMM iteration.
Since the projection input changes only slightly between iterations, the
sorted order is nearly preserved, and an adaptive sorting algorithm can
exploit this to reduce the per-iteration cost in practice.

Acknowledgments
David Pérez-Piñeiro received support from the Research Council of Norway and the
HighEFF Research Centre (Centre for Environmentally Friendly Energy Research,
Grant No. 257632).


