Overview

Authors:

    - Carl-Erik Särndal ,
    - Bengt Swensson ,
    - Jan Wretman

1.  Carl-Erik Särndal
    View author publications

    Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar
2.  Bengt Swensson
    View author publications

    Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar
3.  Jan Wretman
    View author publications

    Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar

[]

Part of the book series: Springer Series in Statistics (SSS)

Buy print copy

[] Softcover Book USD 189.00

Price excludes VAT (USA)

- Compact, lightweight edition
- Dispatched in 3 to 5 business days
- Free shipping worldwide - see info

Buy Softcover Book []

Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout

Licence this eBook for your library []

Learn about institutional subscriptions []

About this book

Now available in paperback. This book provides a comprehensive account
of survey sampling theory and methodology which will be suitable for
students and researchers across a variety of disciplines. A central
theme is to show how statistical modeling is a vital component of the
sampling process and in the choice of estimation technique. Statistical
modeling has strongly influenced sampling theory in recent years and has
clarified many issues related to the uses of auxiliary information in
surveys. This is the first textbook that systematically extends
traditional sampling theory with the aid of a modern model assisted
outlook. The central ideas of sampling theory are developed from the
unifying perspective of unequal probability sampling. The book covers
classical topics as well as areas where significant new developments
have taken place notably domain estimation, variance estimation, methods
for handling nonresponse, models for measurement error, and the analysis
of survey data. The authors have taken care to presuppose nothing more
on the part of the reader than a first course in statistical inference
and regression analysis. Throughout, the emphasis is on statistical
ideas rather than advanced mathematics. Each chapter concludes with a
range of exercises incorporating the analysis of data from actual finite
populations. As a result, all those concerned with survey methodology or
engaged in survey sampling will find this an invaluable and up-to-date
coverage of the subject.

Explore related subjects

Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects.

- Statistical Theory and Methods

Reviews

"I would recommend that this book be in the office of every survey
methodologist."
(Journal of Official Statistics)

Accessibility Information

Accessibility information for this book is coming soon. We're working to
make it available as quickly as possible. Thank you for your patience.

Bibliographic Information

- Book Title: Model Assisted Survey Sampling

- Authors: Carl-Erik Särndal, Bengt Swensson, Jan Wretman

- Series Title: Springer Series in Statistics

- Publisher: Springer New York, NY

- eBook Packages: Springer Book Archive

- Copyright Information: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 1992

- Softcover ISBN: 978-0-387-40620-6Published: 31 October 2003

- Series ISSN: 0172-7397

- Series E-ISSN: 2197-568X

- Edition Number: 1

- Number of Pages: XV, 695

Publish with us

Policies and ethics []

Back to top []
