

verbose,tmargin=1in,bmargin=1in,lmargin=1in,rmargin=1in







date




(),autheryear,,


assumptionAssumption

theoremTheorem



corollaryCorollary
conditionCondition
propositionProposition
definitionDefinition
lemmaLemma
proofProof


stepStepremarkRemarkexampleExample
































 


 



 










Two-phase rejective sampling and its asymptotic properties
Shu YangDepartment of Statistics, North Carolina State University, North Carolina
27695, U.S.A. Email: syang24@ncsu.eduand Peng DingDepartment of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, California
94720, U.S.A. Email: pengdingpku@berkeley.edu

Rejective sampling improves design and estimation efficiency of single-phase
sampling when auxiliary information in a finite population is available.
When such auxiliary information is unavailable, we propose to use
two-phase rejective sampling (TPRS), which involves measuring auxiliary
variables for the sample of units in the first phase, followed by
the implementation of rejective sampling for the outcome in the second
phase. We explore the asymptotic design properties of double expansion
and regression estimators under TPRS. We show that TPRS enhances the
efficiency of the double expansion estimator, rendering it comparable
to a regression estimator. We further refine the design to accommodate
varying importance of covariates and extend it to multi-phase sampling.


 Our asymptotic results for TPRS immediately cover the
existing single-phase rejective sampling, under which the asymptotic
theory has not been fully established. 


 Keywords: Covariate Adjustment; Design Property; Double
Sampling; Multi-Phase Sampling

Introductionsec:Introduction

Two-phase sampling, also known as double sampling, is a cost-effective
method in large surveys, initially using auxiliary variables for broad
measurement in the first phase, followed by targeted measurement of
primary study variables in the second phase. Pioneered byand further developed by and,
two-phase sampling integrates auxiliary variables in both the design
and analysis stages. In the design stage, stratified sampling is often
used to leverage discrete auxiliary variables from the first phase
to inform the selection of the second-phase sample. This strategy
enhances the efficiency of estimators like weighted expansion estimators
oh1983weighting over simple random sampling of the same size.
In the analysis stage, auxiliary variables can be used to enhance
the efficiency of estimation, for example, through regression adjustment.
Regression estimators work for both discrete and continuous variables,
providing gains in efficiency over traditional approaches without
auxiliary variables.

Regression estimators, however, have the practical drawback of having
potential negative weights. Methods such as rejective sampling and
balanced sampling (yates1946review;;
deville2004efficient,deville2005variance;)
have been developed to mitigate the problem of negative weights associated
with regression estimators.

























We introduce two-phase rejective sampling (TPRS) and explore its asymptotic
design properties with commonly-used estimators, namely weighted expansion
and regression estimators.

TPRS allows for using both continuous and discrete auxiliary variables
in the design stage, relaxing the requirement of observing auxiliary
variables in the whole finite population typically associated with
single-phase sampling. TPRS offers several practical benefits: it
ensures an unbiased sample of the target population, reduces the variance
of the population mean estimator for covariates, prevents the selection
of samples with extreme auxiliary variable values, and reduces the
likelihood of negative weights in regression estimators. Additionally,

































The paper proceeds as follows. Section  provides
a review of existing design and analysis strategies of using auxiliary
variables. Sections  and discuss TPRS with simple random sampling and general sampling, respectively.
Section  provides several extensions. Section
 reports simulation results and an application
that illustrates the finite-sample performance of TPRS. We relegate
all technical details and proofs to the supplementary material.

A review of design and analysis strategies of using auxiliary variablessec:A-review-of

Consider a finite population with a known size . For each unit
,  is a -dimensional auxiliary variable, and 
is the study variable of interest. 
The finite population quantities 
are fixed. For simplicity, we suppress the subscript  on 
when there is no ambiguity. The parameter of interest is the finite
population mean of the study variable .

Two-phase sampling offers an efficient and economical method for conducting
large-scale surveys. In this section, we review the existing methods
for using auxiliary variables in two-phase sampling to enhance estimation
efficiency and identify areas needing new strategies.

Existing design strategy: two-phase stratified samplingsubsec:Existing-design-strategy

During the design stage, auxiliary variables are incorporated by selecting
a second-phase sample through stratified sampling. Strata are based
on first-phase variables, either directly from discrete variable categories
or via discretization of continuous variables. We define 
as the stratum indicator vector, where  if unit  is
in stratum , and  otherwise. Two-phase stratified sampling
proceeds as follows: 

[Step] From the population , select a first-phase
sample  of size . For  record .
Define the sample size in each stratum  as  for .
The total first-phase sample size is . 
[Step] From each stratum , randomly select 
units, independently across strata, as the second-phase sample .
For  record the study variable . The total second-phase
sample size is . 
In two-phase sampling, the double-expansion estimator (
estimator;) and the reweighted
expansion estimator (REE;)
are the canonical estimators for the population mean. The 
estimator,




where  with 
and , adjusts individual
observations by the product of their inclusion probabilities in both
phases. We can also replace  in  by ,
emulating the Hajek estimator. However, the combined probability 
is generally not the unconditional probability of a unit being in
the phase- sample ,
the average probability across all possible first-phase samples, unless
 is invariant of the first-phase sample.
The REE,




recalculates the mean estimate for each stratum by a modified ratio
estimator, where the stratum-specific mean of  is approximated
based on phase- data, while the coefficient is derived from phase-
data. These estimators are often more efficient than the sample mean
estimator under simple random sampling with the same size . 

Existing analysis strategy: regression adjustment







In simple random sampling across both phases, we observe variable
 in phase I and variables  in phase II. Then we can calculate
the mean estimates 
from phase I and 
from phase II. The two-phase regression estimator is 



where 

is the regression coefficient based on the phase-II sample.

The regression estimator  can also be written as
a weighted average of the second-phase outcomes, where the corresponding
weights are called the generalized regression estimation weights.
The regression estimator provides improved efficiency over 
in large samples if  is predictive of . However, issues
like large numbers of -variables or imbalance between 
and  can lead to extreme or negative weights and affect
the performance of  in finite samples. Researchers
have explored various methods to mitigate the issue of negative weights
associated with regression estimators, such as balanced sampling or
rejective sampling, but these approaches have mainly been studied
in single-phase sampling (yates1946review;;
deville2004efficient;;).

We have reviewed existing design and analysis strategies in multi-phase
sampling for better efficiency, but currently it lacks strategies
for integrating both continuous and discrete variables in the design
stage. We will explore rejective sampling in multi-phase sampling
to fill the gap.

TPRS: two-phase rejective samplingsec:Proposed-method

Setup and notation

Throughout this paper, we use  and  to be generic notation
for variables, which can be components of either  or . Define
, , and 
as expectation, covariance, and variance under the sampling design.
The finite population mean for  and covariance for 
and  are 

The phase-I sample mean for  and covariance for  and
 are


We assume  and  are positive definite.  

We introduce general notation to be used throughout the paper. For
a generic vector , let  denote . Define
 as the random variable bounded in probability, and 
as the random variable that converges to zero in probability as 
increases. Let  represent the th quantile
of the standard normal distribution.

TPRS with simple random sampling

Rejective sampling aims for balanced phase-II sample selection by
comparing the mean differences between phase-II and phase-I samples.
We define TPRS with simple random sampling as follows.

[TPRS with simple random sampling]TPRS
with simple random sampling consists of two steps: 

[Step] Select a phase- sample  of size 
by simple random sampling. For  record . 
[Step] Select a phase- sample  of size 
by simple random sampling from phase- sample . Accept the
phase- sample if 



where  is a pre-specified constant, and 
is the phase- design variance of 
given . For  record . 

In Definition , if  is below a specified threshold
, the phase-II sample is considered balanced and accepted
for further analysis. Based on the TPRS, the sample mean estimator
for the population mean  is 





Large-sample design properties

We investigate the asymptotic design-based property of 
under TPRS in Definition . For asymptotic inference,
we adopt the framework of, which establishes
the asymptotic properties of estimators within a fixed sequence of
populations and corresponding random samples. This involves a series
of nested finite populations 
and sequences of samples with increasing sample sizes 
and ).
For simplicity, we will not explicitly mention the dependence of ,
, and  on , and refer to the asymptotic
regime as the scenario where index  or  goes to infinity. 

The linear projection of  onto  in the finite population
 is ,
where 



which equals 



Assume  contains IID samples from a superpopulation of 
with two conditions: (i) The sequence of  has finite 
moments for some , implying 
and  with respect to the superpopulation
model; (ii)  and 
for some  and . 

Assumption (i) sets moment conditions
for the superpopulation, which aids in applying central limit theorems.
chen2007asymptotic studied sufficient moment conditions on
the finite population that ensure the asymptotic normality of estimators
in two-phase sampling. Assumption (i) implies
that for any components  and  of  and , 

where  is a constant vector or matrix. Assumption (ii)
defines the sampling fractions  and  for the
phase-I and phase-II samples, respectively. Sampling from a finite
population or phase-I sample without replacement can introduce dependency
among the individual samples. The sampling fractions serve to adjust
for such dependency when calculating the asymptotic design variances
and covariances.

Define the adjusted outcome as .
The error in the sample mean estimator  of the population
mean  decomposes into three parts: 

In (), 
and  represent the
errors of  and  in the phase-II sample conditional on the
phase-I sample, respectively, and 
represents the error of  in the phase-I sample. The limiting distribution
of  is given in the following lemma.

Suppose Assumption holds. Without the rejection step in TPRS in Definition ,
 in the decomposition ()
has the following limiting distribution: 















 for all sequences of finite populations, where  is
defined in (), and  and  are
defined in Assumption .


With the rejection step in TPRS, the distribution of the error 
equals 
without rejective sampling. We use the normalized distance 
for the phase-II sample to represent the acceptance criteria 
by . By Lemma , 
and thus  a.s.. We define
the superpopulation squared correlation between  and  as .
We show the limiting distribution of 
comprises three independent random components.

Suppose Assumption holds. Under TPRS in Definition , 
follows the limiting distribution: 

n_^1/2(y_-y_0)(Q_<^2) (1-f_,)V_yyR^2 ^1/2L_p,^2

+ (1-f_,)V_yy(1-R^2) ^1/2Z_1+ f_,(1-f_,0)V_yy ^1/2Z_2,where 

with ,
 follows a uniform distribution on , 
, and 
is the first coordinate of the uniform random vector over the -dimensional
unit sphere,  and  are standard normal variables,
and  are jointly independent.


The random variable , first introduced infor rerandomization in causal inference, is also relevant here. Our
context is more complex due to the uncertainty in phase-I estimators.

Denote , which equals 
by () and is less than or equal to .

Under Assumption and TPRS in Definition , the asymptotic design variance
of  is 



The percentage reduction in asymptotic design variance compared with
the standard two-phase simple random sampling is 

provided . If  indicating
a census situation, this reduction is zero. 












From Theorem  and Corollary , we discuss
the trade-off between variance and utility of the sample when selecting
. A lower  reduces the asymptotic variance
of , and in particular, 
can be eliminated from the asymptotic distribution ()
if  approaches . In
the limit with , the asymptotic distribution
of  under TPRS is approximately the same as the sum
of two normal random variables .
However, it also lowers the acceptance rate for the phase-II sample
and potentially limits randomness and observations in the tail of
the  distribution, as discussed by


In practice, if the primary focus is the
population parameter associated with,
we recommend settingto the 
quantile of the distribution. This
results in an approximate acceptance rate of , as in a related
experimental design context 
Moreover, when , indicating no correlation between auxiliary
and study variables, the rejective procedure does not affect the limiting
distribution for . Conversely, with , the
variance reduction for  is maximized due to the strong
correlation between auxiliary and study variables.

Regression estimator

Design and analysis strategies can be integrated:combined rejective sampling and regression adjustment in surveys,
and combined rerandomization and regression
adjustment in experiments. Under TPRS, a regression estimator is 

with  specified earlier in ().
To derive the asymptotic distribution of  in
TPRS, we decompose it as follows 

Here,  represents the
error of  in the phase-II sample conditional on the phase-I sample,

is of order , and 
represents the error of  in the phase-I sample. The limiting distribution
of  is given in the following theorem.

Suppose Assumption holds. Under TPRS in Definition , the regression estimator
 in () has the following limiting
distribution:


, where  is defined in (), ,
and  and  are defined in Assumption .


fuller2009some provided the consistency and asymptotic variance
of the regression estimator under single phase rejective sampling,
but did not include the asymptotic distribution results. The asymptotic
distribution result in Theorem  complements's
work, specifically by considering a census in phase .

The limiting distribution of 
in () under TPRS does not depend on ,
and as  increases, it becomes equivalent to non-rejective
sampling. This demonstrates the equivalence of the limiting distributions
of  with and without rejective sampling, aligning
with, who found similar performance of regression
estimators in single-phase samples regardless of rejective sampling.

Theorems  and  highlight the role of
rejective sampling in estimation. When , the
asymptotic design variance of the simple mean estimator 
is close to that of the two-phase regression estimator .
That is, the simple mean estimator under rejective sampling performs
similarly to the regression estimator. 




Despite
similar limiting properties with and without rejective sampling,recommended rejective sampling for its practical benefits. We can
express the regression estimator as a weighted average of the 's
in the phase-II sample ,
where 



are the weights. Without rejective sampling,  may be
negative due to influential values of , which affects the
robustness of the regression estimator. Rejective sampling reduces
this chance, as demonstrated by simulation fromunder single-phase sampling and further confirmed by our simulation
under TPRS. 



Moreover, rejective sampling improves the covariate balances in phase-II
sample, evidenced by a smaller asymptotic design variance of 
compared with designs without rejective sampling. Specially, under
TPRS, the limit of the design covariance 
is always no larger than that without rejective sampling .

Inference: variance estimators and confidence intervalssubsec:ve-srs

To infer the population mean  based on Theorems and , we first estimate the asymptotic design
variances and covariances. Let the estimator for  be





Under Assumption ,
 is a consistent estimator of  under both
two-phase simple random sampling and TPRS in Definition .


A consistent estimator for  is .
The variance estimator for  under TPRS is 



Define  for phase-II
samples. Then, we can estimate  by 



where  adjusts for degrees of freedom due to estimating
. Decompose  into 
and estimate it by .
A consistent variance estimator for  is 


We can construct the asymptotic  confidence interval
of  based on  as 



where  as the th quantile of the
distribution of 



and the counterpart based on  as 





TPRS with general samplingsec:General=000020pi=000020estimator 

Notation








We now consider two-phase sampling with general phase- and 
designs. Let  be the probability of including unit 
in the phase- sample , and let  be
the conditional probability of including unit  in the phase-
sample  given that unit  is in the phase- sample. Let
 and  be the sample sizes of the phase-I sample
and the phase-II sample, respectively. 

Define the finite population mean as .
With slight abuse of the notation, define the phase- estimator
and the phase-II estimator as 

and 

respectively. The phase-I estimator is a Hájek estimator for ,
while the phase-II estimator, known as the double expansion estimator
kott1997can or a  estimator,
is generally not a Hájek estimator for  because 
is not the probability of  being selected for phase II in general
as we discussed in Section .

To calculate the design variances for () and (),
we require positive second-order inclusion probabilities. The probabilities,
 and ,
determine the probability or the conditional probability of pairs
of units being included in phase-I and phase-II samples, respectively.

Under suitable regularity conditions on sampling (with details in
Section ), the sums 
and  are design consistent
for the population size . Using Taylor expansion and ignoring
small order terms, the design covariance of  and 
is


and the conditional design covariance of  and 
given the phase- sample is 

We assume that  and  are positive definite
for all phase-I samples.

TPRS with general samplingsubsec:Two-phase-rejective

We define TPRS with general sampling designs as follows.

[TPRS with general sampling]TPRS with general sampling consists of two steps: 

[Step] Select a phase- sample  by a general 
sampling with the inclusion probability . For 
record . 
[Step] Treat the phase- sample  as the population
and select a phase- sample  by a general  sampling
with the conditional inclusion probability .
Accept the phase- sample if 



where  is a pre-specified constant, and 
is the design variance of  given ,
given by () with  and  being . For 
record . 

For the population mean , the  estimator is

recalling that . We
focus on the  estimator for simplicity because the REE reviewed
in Section  is more natural
for two-phase stratified sampling. Below we will show that integrating
the  estimator with TPRS suffices to attain favorable design
properties.

Large-sample design properties

To understand the limiting properties of , we follow
the asymptotic framework in Section  and
specify the following regularity conditions for TPRS in Definition
.

Assumption (i)
and (ii) hold. (iii) The phase- estimator () satisfies



with , where 
represents components of either  or .

(iv) The sequence of phase- selection probabilities are bounded
by  for
all , for some positive  and ,
and the design weighted sums of moments converge to constants, 



where  is a matrix of constants.

(v) The phase- estimator () satisfies 



and ;

(vi) The sequence of phase- selection probabilities are bounded
by 
for all , for some positive  and ,
and the design weighted sums of moments converge to constants, 



where  is a matrix of constants.

(vii) The design covariance between the differences in  and 
in phases I and II is negligible: .


The conditions in Assumption  are standard
for sample moments and sampling designs (fuller2009sampling,
Theorem 3.3.1). They ensure the general applicability of the phase-I
and phase-II estimators across various designs (Chapter 3,).
For instance, Assumption (vii) holds under
two-phase simple random sampling and stratified sampling. A heuristic
explanation is provided below. Let 
be the residual based on the phase-I regression had the study variables
been measured in the phase-I sample, where
is the phase-I regression coefficient. Then, we have .
Recall that , which can be written
as . Thus, we
have 

Because 
, where the probability distribution in  is induced
by phase-II sampling given , and ,
where the probability distribution in  is induced by phase-I
sampling, the quantity in () is of order . 

Following the decomposition in (), we decompose
 into three components

where ,
, and 
with the general  estimators for  and 
defined in () and (), respectively. The
limiting distribution of  is given in the following
lemma.

Suppose Assumption holds. Without the rejection step in TPRS in Definition ,
the joint distribution of  in the decomposition
() has the following limiting distribution:
















 for all sequences of finite populations, where 



By construction, the distribution of 
under TPRS in Definition  is equivalent to the
distribution of 
without rejective sampling. To study the asymptotic design property,
we define .
Then,  is expressed as , with 
and thus  a.s..

Suppose Assumption holds. Under TPRS  in Definition , 
follows the limiting distribution: 
where ,  and  are defined in ()-(),
 and  are standard normal variables, and 
are jointly independent.


The results of TPRS with general sampling are similar to those of
TPRS with simple random sampling, hence inheriting all the benefits,
including enhanced covariate balance, and reduced variance and quantile
range, as detailed in Section .

Regression estimator

Integrating the design and analysis strategies, the two-phase regression
estimator for  is 

where 



is the regression coefficient based on the phase-II sample.

Suppose Assumption holds. Under TPRS in Definition , the regression
estimator  in () has the following
limiting distribution:



 for all sequences of finite populations, where 



with  and  defined in ()
and (), respectively.


Theorem  indicates that the advantages of TPRS are
also applicable to the regression estimator in a general setup.

Inference: variance estimators and confidence intervalssubsec:ve-pi

We estimate the asymptotic design variances of  and
 in general TPRS. For , the variance
is estimated by 
where 

and  and 
are () with  being . For ,
the variance is estimated by 

Regarding variance estimation in
two-phase sampling, two points are noteworthy. First, obtaining the
joint inclusion probabilities  and 
may be difficult in practice, and approximations may be needed. For
example, andconsidered a simplified variance estimator which does not require
the information on  and specified conditions
under which the bias of the variance estimator is negligible.

Second, while Horvitz-Thompson-type variance estimators ()
and () are standard, they can be unstable and negative
in unequal probability sampling. An alternative is the Sen-Yates-Grundy-type
(sen1953estimate,yates1953selection) variance estimators

These estimators are asymptotically equivalent to  and
 with additional mean zero terms but are more stable
and non-negative for various sampling designs with fixed sample sizes
hidiroglou2009variance.


We can construct the asymptotic  confidence interval
for  based on  as



where  as the th quantile
of the distribution of ,
and the counterpart based on  as





Extensionssec:Extensions

Other designs

When covariates have varying importance, applying different thresholds
for different covariates in rejective sampling can be more effective.
Legg2010 explored two approaches for this: 
 and sequential rejective sampling, with the former
also studied by and the latter byand in rerandomization in experiments. We
further develop sequential rejective sampling in two-phase sampling
in Section  of the supplementary
material and demonstrate that it provides better balance control for
each specific covariate compared with weighted rejective sampling. 

Moreover, we introduce multi-phase rejective sampling and establish
asymptotic design properties of the double expansion estimator and
the regression estimator in Section of the supplementary material. As a special case, if phase I is a
census, the three-phase rejective sampling reduces to TPRS with rejective
sampling in both phases. In both sequential and multi-phase rejective
sampling methods, we employ block-wise Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization
on tiers or phases of covariates. This strategy ensures a clear distinction
between various sets of covariates, categorizing them according to
their level of importance or their availability across different phases.

General parameters

























follows the limiting distribution:


























Empirical studiessec:Simulation

We evaluate the finite-sample performance of rejective sampling through
simulation. We first apply the TPRS with simple random sampling in
Section . We then apply the three-phase rejective
sampling based on an actual study in Section  to
showcase the effectiveness of multiple phases.

TPRS with simple random samplingsubsec:sim1

Consider the finite population with bivariate data ,
where  and 
with  and . This setup yields
 values of .

We implement two-phase simple random sampling with phase-I and phase-II
sample sizes of  and , respectively,
and the corresponding TPRS with various .
We compare the mean estimators  and 
in both sampling scenarios.

We summarize the results in Tables  and .
In all scenarios,  with rejective sampling improves
the efficiency of  without rejective sampling with
the percentage of variance reduction increasing with  and
decreasing with , which is cohesive with our theoretical
results in Theorem  and Corollary . Table
 presents the theoretical values of percentage of
variance reduction () under the simulation
setup. The results in Table  are consistent with
that in Table . The performance of 
with rejective sampling is close to that of ,
and the results for  in both rejective and non-rejective
samples are similar, aligning with our theoretical results in Theorem
.

Moreover, the regression
weights in  can be negative for  simulated
datasets under two-phase non-rejective sampling; however, the regression
weights are always positive with rejective sampling in this simulation
setting. This demonstrates the practical value of rejective sampling.
Additionally, our variance estimators and confidence intervals, based
on the asymptotic variance formula, prove accurate in both variance
estimation and coverage rates, as evidenced in Table .


tab:Sim1-1Simulation results based on  Monte
Carlo samples: bias (Bias ), variance (Var ),
mean squared error (MSE ), variance estimate (VE )
and coverage rate (Cvg ) for  confidence intervals calculated
based on the asymptotic variance formula, and the percentage of variance
reduction of the estimator (VarRed ) under rejective sampling
compared to the corresponding estimator under two phase sample random
sampling. 





tab:Sim1-2Theoretical values of percentage of variance
reduction under the simulation setup





Three-phase sampling based on the Academic Performance Index datasubsec:sim2 

To demonstrate the practical relevance, we use the Academic Performance
Index (API) data. The full population data consist of  observations
for all California schools with at least 100 students based on standardized
testing of students. We use the API in 2000 as the study variable
, the API in 1999 as the auxiliary variable , and the percentage
of English Language Learners, the percentage of students eligible
for subsidized meals, the percentage of students for whom this is
the first year at the school as additional auxiliary variable 
in both the design and analysis stages. The parameter of interest
is the population mean of the API in 2000.

We employed three-phase sampling designs. We select a phase-I sample
 of size  by simple random sampling. For ,
we observe . We select a phase-II sample  of size 
by Poisson sampling with , where
 is the expected sample size of the phase-II sample,
 and . For ,
we observe  and calculate .
We select a phase- sample  by Poisson sampling with 
where  is the expected sample size of the phase-III
sample,  is proportional to the summation of components
in  and . For , we
observe . We consider the above three-phase sampling without
rejective sampling and with rejective sampling described in Section
. 

For comparison, we also consider two-phase sampling designs. In a
two-phase sampling, we assume that the outcome is measured for the
phase- samples. This may be more costly than the three-phase
sampling.

Simulation results, summarized in Figures  and ,
show that phase-II estimators are more efficient due to more information
collection, but phase-III designs might provide greater cost-effectiveness.
For instance, phase-II rejective regression estimators with an average
sample size of  had a variance of , compared with
phase-III estimators with a smaller average sample size of 
but a higher variance of . This implies that multiple phases
can achieve desired variances with smaller samples. The efficiency
of rejective regression estimators improves with tighter constraints
 and  , especially 
. Increasing the phase-II sample size showed minimal impact on the
efficiency of phase-III estimator. The coverage rates of the confidence
intervals align well with the nominal level, confirming our results
on the asymptotic distributions.





Footnote: n2 is , n3 is ,
g1 is , and g2 is ; simple2 and
reg2 are  and  without rejective
sampling; rej2 and rej-reg2 are  and 
with rejective sampling; simple3 and reg3 are  and
 without rejective sampling; rej3 and rej-reg3
are  and  with rejective sampling.

fig:2-1Simulation results for simple estimators and
regression estimators under two/three-phase w/o rejective sampling
with 





Footnote: n2 is , n3 is ,
g1 is , and g2 is ; simple2 and
reg2 are  and  without rejective
sampling; rej2 and rej-reg2 are  and 
with rejective sampling; simple3 and reg3 are  and
 without rejective sampling; rej3 and rej-reg3
are  and  with rejective sampling.

fig:2-2Simulation results for simple estimators and
regression estimators under two/three-phase w/o rejective sampling
with 




Footnote: n2 is , n3 is ,
simple2 and reg2 are  and  without
rejective sampling; rej2 and rej-reg2 are  and 
with rejective sampling; simple3 and reg3 are  and
 without rejective sampling; rej3 and rej-reg3
are  and  with rejective sampling.

fig:2-3-cvgCoverage rates


Acknowledgments

We thank the associate editor and two reviewers for helpful comments.
Chongguang Tao proofread the final version of the paper. Yang was
partially funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (grant
 1R01AG066883) and the U.S. National Science Foundation (grant 
SES 2242776). Ding was partially funded by the U.S. National Science
Foundation (grant  1945136). 

dcu



Sequation

Slemma

Stable

Sexample

Sdefinition

Ssection

Stheorem

Scondition

Sremark

Sstep

Sassumption

Sproof

Sproposition

Sfigure
 

Spage

Supplementary material
center

 arabic


Section  describes sequential
rejective sampling with tiers of covariates. Section presents multi-phase rejective sampling. Section provides all proofs. 

Sequential rejective sampling with tiers of covariatessec:Sequential-rejective-sampling

Partition covariate  into  tiers of decreasing importance,
denoted by , each  having dimension .
Let . It is convenient to apply
the block-wise Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization to the covariates:
construct  from , and 



for . We assume 
 for  under suitable regularity conditions. See the
discussion of Assumption (vii) in the main
paper. For each tier , we can impose a threshold ,
where  is a positive constant and  is the
weight for tier , with higher  indicating a stricter
threshold.

We define two-phase sequential rejective sampling (TPSRS) as follows.

[TPSRS with general sampling]TPSRS with general sampling consists of two steps: 

[Step] Select a phase-I sample  by a general 
sampling with the inclusion probability . For 
record . 
[Step] Treat the phase-I sample  as the population
and select a phase-II sample  by a general  sampling with
the conditional inclusion probability given unit  is in the phase- sample. Accept the phase-II
sample if

done sequentially from tier  to . For  record . 

In a weighted rejective sampling, we accept the phase-II
sample if

where the 's may be different from the ones in the sequential
rejective sampling as in ().

Sequential rejective sampling, unlike weighted rejective sampling,
ensures balance across all tiers, as it requires each tier to individually
meet its threshold. Weighted rejective sampling is less stringent,
allowing some tiers to be poorly balanced if others are well balanced.

 The limiting distributions
of  and  under weighted rejective
sampling () are more complicated compared
with the TPSRS in Definition .


To study the limiting properties of , let 
be the probability limit of . By the Gram-Schmidt
orthogonalization,  is a diagonal matrix with the th
block diagonal component . We decompose 
as  with 
being the probability of . The
decomposition of  then becomes 
*
Let ,
then . For any , 
and  are asymptotically independent
given  . Therefore, 



has the same limiting distribution of 



Theorem  below describes the limiting distributions
of  and  under TPSRS with general
sampling.

Suppose Assumption holds. Under TPSRS in Definition , 
follows the limiting distribution:

 where 
 and  are defined in () and (),
respectively,  and  are independent standard normal
variables, and 
are jointly independent. Moreover, 





Multi-phase rejective samplingsec:Multi-phase-rejective-sampling

Notation

We extend our theory to multi-phase rejective sampling. To simplify
the presentation, we discuss three-phase sampling below. Let ,
, and  represent the probabilities
of a unit being included in the phase-I, phase-II, and phase-III samples,
with each phase indexed by ,  and , respectively.
The combined probability for phase-III is .
Let , , and  be the sampling sizes of
the phase-I sample, the phase-II sample, and the phase-III sample,
respectively. 

For the finite population mean , the phase-, phase-II,
and phase-III estimators are (), (),
and 

respectively. The design variance for the phase-III estimator involves
conditional second-order inclusion probabilities .
By Taylor expansion and ignoring the small order terms, the design
covariance of  and  given
the phase- sample is 



Three-phase rejective samplingsubsec:Three-phase-rejective-sampling

We define a three-phase rejective sampling method with -dimensional
phase-I covariate  and -dimensional phase-II covariate
 as follows.

[Three-phase rejective sampling with general sampling]Three-phase rejective sampling with general sampling consists of three
steps: 

[Step] Select a phase- sample  by a general 
sampling with the inclusion probability . For 
record . 
[Step] Select a phase- sample  by a general
 sampling with the conditional inclusion probability 
given unit  is in the phase- sample. Accept the phase-
sample if 



where , and  is the positive definite
design variance of  given the phase-
sample. For  record . It is convenient to apply
the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization to  and construct a
phase- covariate ,
where 

Let  represent the combined vector of phase-
covariates, where  can be seen as the part of  that is both
correlated with  and orthogonal to , representing the additional
information beyond what is available from phase . 
[Step] Select a phase- rejective sample  by
a general  sampling with the conditional inclusion probability
 given unit  is in the phase- sample.
Accept the phase- sample if 



where , and  is the positive definite
design variance of  given the phase-
sample. For  record  . 

In Step 3, balance can be directly controlled on 
instead of , because  is a linear
transformation of  and 
given  and the Mahalanobis distance is invariant
to linear transformations.

For the population mean , the  estimator based
on the phase- rejective sample is 



To derive the asymptotic properties of , we need
the following regularity condition. 

 The phase-
estimator () satisfies 



with ,
where  represents components of either  or . 

The sequence of phase- selection probabilities are bounded by

for all  for some positive  and .
Assume that the design is such that 



where  is a matrix of constants. Moreover, .


Suppose Assumptions and  hold. Under three-phase rejective
sampling in Definition ,  follows
the limiting distribution:

n_^1/2(y_-y_0)(Q_z,<_1^2,Q_c,<_2^2)

V_,1^1/2L_p_1+p_2,_2^2+V_,2^1/2Z_1+V_,3^1/2L_p_1,_1^2+V_,4^1/2Z_2+V_,5^1/2Z_3,where 

, , and  are standard normal variables, and

are jointly independent.


Regression estimatorsubsec:Regression-estimator

Integrating the design and analysis strategies, the three-phase regression
estimator of  is 

where  by our construction of , and



The regression estimator exhibitsthe same asymptotic
behavior, irrespective of the use of rejective sampling.

Under Assumptions and , under three-phase rejective sampling
in Definition , the regression estimator 
in () has the following limiting distribution:



 for all sequences of finite populations, where 



and ,  and  are defined in (),
() and (), respectively.


Thus, the limiting distribution of 
remains unchanged with or without rejective procedure. Combining the
results from Theorems  and  suggests that
utilizing auxiliary variables in both the design stage (via rejective
sampling) and analysis stage (via regression) can improve estimation
efficiency.

Inference: variance estimators and confidence intervalssubsec:ve-pi-1

We derive the asymptotic design variance formula. Let 
be () with  and  being 
and , ,
and  be () with  being
. We estimate , 
and  by 
*
respectively. Then, the variance estimator for  is



The variance estimator for  is 

We can construct the asymptotic  confidence interval
for  based on  as



where  as the th
quantile of the distribution of ,
and the counterpart based on  as





Proofs sec:Proofs

Useful lemmas

We state some useful lemmas for two-phase simple random sampling.

 
and .



and .



and .


Lemmas  and  are standard
textbook results; therefore,
we omit their proofs.

For a sequence of finite populations, the variability of the estimators
comes from the sampling design. In the following proofs for the asymptotic
design properties, the asymptotic design variance and covariance (the
limits of the design variance and covariances), denoted by 

Proof of Lemma 

Recall the following definitions ,
,
and . The asymptotic
normality follows by Assumption ; see, e.g., Chapter
1 in.

Because  is a simple random sample from , and  is
a simple random sample from , by Lemma ,
we have 

and therefore , for .

We then show the asymptotic variance formulas. First, the asymptotic
design variance of  given  is 
*
where the second equality follows by () and Lemma ,
and the third equality follows by Lemma . Second,
by writing ,
the asymptotic design variance of  given  is 
*
where the second equality follows by () and Lemma ,
and the third equality follows by Lemma . Third,
the asymptotic design variance of  given  is ,
.

Finally, we show that all covariances of cross terms are zero asymptotically.
We have 

where the second equality follows by Lemma .
Because conditional on  and ,  is a constant, we
then have 

Combining ()-(), we have 
*

Combining all results, we complete the proof.

Proof of Theorem 

To express () further, by the moment condition in Assumption
, we have ,
*
and therefore 
We then express () as 


Under TPRS in Definition , based on (),
the design variance 
is approximately 
*
where the second equality follows by Lemma .

Under TPRS in Definition , 
is equivalent to 
without rejective sampling. Similar to (), we can show
that  and  are asymptotically
independent. Moreover, we can show that 
and  are asymptotically independent. Based on (),
 and  are
asymptotically independent. As a result, 
has the same distribution under two-phase sampling with and without
rejective sampling.

Proof of Proposition 

We follow the proofs in. Under TPRS in Definition
,  , and 
*
where the last line follows from Assumption .
Next, we have 

To further evaluate (), we have 
*
and 
*
Therefore, under Assumption , 


By the law of total probability, we have
*
Combining the above inequality with (), we obtain
*
Therefore, , which completes the proof.

Proof of Lemma 

By the constructions of phase  and  samples and estimators,
we have 

and therefore , for .

We then show the asymptotic variance formulas. First, the asymptotic
design variance of  given  is 
*
(T_1)_N(T_1)=_N[ E(T_1,) +E (T_1,) ]

=_N[0+E n_N^2_i_j_ij-_i_j_i^*_j^*(y_i-y_0)(y_j-y_0) ]=V_1, .
Second, the asymptotic design variance of  given  is
*
(T_2)_N(T_2)=_N[ E(T_2,) +E (T_2,) ]

=_N[0+E n_N^2_i_j_ij-_i_j_i^*_j^*(e_i-e_0)(e_j-e_0) ]=V_2, .
Third, the asymptotic design variance of  given  is 
*
(T_3)_N(T_3)

=_N n_N^2_i=1^N_j=1^N_ij-_i_j_i_j(y_i-y_0)(y_j-y_0) =V_3, .
Note that ,  and  are finite, guaranteed by
Assumption .

Finally, we show that all covariances of cross terms are zero asymptotically.
By Assumption (vii), 
. Because conditional on ,  is a constant, we
then have 

Combining ()-(), we have 
*

Combining all results completes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 

To derive the asymptotic design property of the two-phase regression
estimator, we use the following decomposition:
*
where the second equality follows by 
due to  and .

Therefore, the asymptotic design variance of 
is 
*


Proof of Remark 

For the phase- and phase- sample sizes, we have 
)
By taking the expectation of (), we obtain 

By taking the conditional expectation of () given ,
we obtain 


Multiplying () by  and multiplying ()
by  we obtain 

By taking the expectation of (), we obtain 

By taking the conditional expectation of () given ,
we obtain 


We now write 
*
Moreover,

where () follows by (), and ()
follows by (). Therefore, 
is asymptotically equivalent to  adding a mean zero
term.

We also write 
*
Moreover, 

where () follows by () and ().
Therefore,  is asymptotically equivalent
to  adding a mean zero term.

Proof Theorem 

We use the following decomposition: 
*
We have 
and .
Therefore, we have 
*


Proof of Theorem 

To derive the asymptotic design properties of the three-phase regression
estimator, we use the following facts: 



where the probability distribution in  is due to phase-III
random sampling given , ,
and  is defined as () with
 and  being  and , and 



the probability distribution in  is due to phase-II random
sampling given . Therefore, we use the following decomposition:
*
By repeated application of conditional expectation arguments, the
asymptotic design variance of  is 



Then, under Assumptions  and ,
we establish the result in Theorem .

Proof of Theorem 

We first state the regularity conditions for Theorem .

 The following conditions
hold for the population parameter  and the population estimating
function : 

[(i)]  The population parameter  lies within a closed interval
.
[(ii)]  The function  is bounded.
[(iii)]  The population estimating function  converges
uniformly to  on  as ,
and the equation  has a unique root within the interior
of .
[(iv)]  The limiting function  is strictly increasing in each
component of  and absolutely continuous, with finite first and
second derivatives in . Additionally, the derivative
 is bounded away from zero within
.
[(v)]  The following conditions on the population quantities are satisfied:



and




Assumption (i)-(iv) are common for M-estimators
serfling1980approximation. Assumption (v)
applies to differentiable estimating functions and has been examined
by for non-differentiable estimating functions.
wang2011asymptotic demonstrate that under appropriate conditions
on the probability mechanism generating the  values and the
function , Assumption (v) holds
with probability one.

We will now show the results in Theorem .
Under Assumption , and using the theory for
M-estimators for differentiable estimating functions or the results
of for non-differentiable estimating functions,
we can express

By Assumption (iv),  is
smooth, implying  
and the left-hand side of () is  

Because Assumption  holds for ,
we define the residual vector as 



where 



Under TPRS  in Definition , we have
where  and  are standard normal variables, and 
are jointly independent.

Combining the results () and (),
we obtain



as . 
